README.md, before:

# Academic Reader

PDF → readable HTML converter using [Marker](https://github.com/datalab-to/marker).

Supports PDF, DOCX, XLSX, PPTX, HTML, EPUB, and images.

## Quick Start

```bash
cp .env.dev.example .env.dev   # Configure dev environment
bun run dev                    # Start development servers
```

## Backend Modes

| Mode      | GPU           | File Storage     | Setup                      |
| --------- | ------------- | ---------------- | -------------------------- |
| `local`   | Your machine  | Local filesystem | NVIDIA GPU + Docker        |
| `runpod`  | Runpod cloud  | S3/R2/MinIO      | Runpod API key + S3 config |
| `datalab` | Datalab cloud | Memory (temp)    | Datalab API key            |

Set `BACKEND_MODE` in `.env.dev` for development.

## Architecture

```
                                 Browser
                                    │
                                    ▼
                           Cloudflare (proxy/protection)
                                    │
                                    ▼
                             VPS port 443
                                    │
                                    ▼
                          Traefik (Dokploy's proxy)
                                    │
                    ┌───────────────┴───────────────┐
                    │                               │
            Host: academic-reader.com    Host: convex-api.academic-reader.com
                    │                               │
                    ▼                               ▼
              app container               convex-backend container
                    │
                    ▼
        ┌────────── OR ──────────┐
        │                        │
     Datalab              Runpod ◀──▶ R2
```

Frontend and API served from VPS via Dokploy. Cloudflare proxy provides DDoS protection and caching.

### API Endpoints

| Endpoint                      | Purpose                     |
| ----------------------------- | --------------------------- |
| `POST /api/upload`            | Upload file (to S3 or temp) |
| `POST /api/convert/:fileId`   | Start conversion job        |
| `GET /api/jobs/:jobId/stream` | SSE progress stream         |
| `GET /api/download/:jobId`    | Download converted HTML     |
| `GET /api/auth/*`             | Auth (proxied to Convex)    |

### Storage

- **local mode** - /tmp/academic-reader-uploads/{uuid}.{ext} (dev mode only)
- **datalab mode** - In-Memory: API accepts files directly for processing
- **runpod mode** - S3/R2 cloud for prod, MinIO with temp tunnel for dev

## Development

```bash
bun run dev            # Start with mode from .env.dev
bun run dev:local      # Override to local mode
bun run dev:datalab    # Override to datalab mode
bun run dev:runpod     # Override to runpod mode
```

Add `--dashboard` to enable Convex dashboard at localhost:6791.

All modes use self-hosted Convex via Docker - no account needed.

## Production Deployment

Production uses [Dokploy](https://dokploy.com) for container orchestration with automatic deployments via GitHub Actions.

### Prerequisites

1. VPS with Dokploy installed
2. Domain with DNS on Cloudflare (proxy enabled)
3. Docker Hub account

### Deployment Flow

```
Push to main
    │
    ├─► GitHub Actions builds image
    │   └─► Pushes to Docker Hub
    │       └─► Dokploy detects new tag and redeploys
    │
    └─► If frontend/convex/* changed
        └─► GitHub Actions deploys Convex functions
```

### Initial Setup

1. **Install Dokploy on VPS**

   ```bash
   curl -sSL https://dokploy.com/install.sh | sh
   ```

2. **Deploy Convex** (via Dokploy Compose with the self-hosted Convex blueprint)

3. **Deploy App** (via Dokploy Docker Image from Docker Hub)

4. **Configure domains** in Dokploy:
   - `yourdomain.com` → app container (port 8787)
   - `convex.yourdomain.com` → convex-backend (port 3210)

5. **Set up Cloudflare DNS**:

   ```
   A    @        <VPS_IP>    Proxied
   A    convex   <VPS_IP>    Proxied
   ```

6. **Generate Convex admin key**:

   ```bash
   docker exec <convex-container> ./generate_admin_key.sh
   ```

7. **Add GitHub Secrets**:
   - `DOCKERHUB_USERNAME`
   - `DOCKERHUB_TOKEN`
   - `CONVEX_ADMIN_KEY`
   - `GOOGLE_CLIENT_ID`
   - `GOOGLE_CLIENT_SECRET`
   - `BETTER_AUTH_SECRET`

### Convex Dashboard

The dashboard is not publicly exposed. Access options:

- Via Tailscale: `http://your-vps-tailscale-hostname:6791`
- Via SSH tunnel: `ssh -L 6791:localhost:6791 user@your-vps`

## Configuration

### Development (.env.dev)

| Variable             | Required     | Description                            |
| -------------------- | ------------ | -------------------------------------- |
| `BACKEND_MODE`       | Yes          | `local`, `runpod`, or `datalab`        |
| `SITE_URL`           | Yes          | Frontend URL (default: localhost:5173) |
| `DATALAB_API_KEY`    | datalab      | From [datalab.to](https://datalab.to)  |
| `RUNPOD_API_KEY`     | runpod       | From Runpod dashboard                  |
| `RUNPOD_ENDPOINT_ID` | runpod       | Your endpoint ID                       |
| `GOOGLE_API_KEY`     | local/runpod | For Gemini API                         |

### Production (set in Dokploy UI)

**App Container:**

| Variable          | Required | Description              |
| ----------------- | -------- | ------------------------ |
| `BACKEND_MODE`    | Yes      | `datalab` or `runpod`    |
| `SITE_URL`        | Yes      | <https://yourdomain.com> |
| `DATALAB_API_KEY` | datalab  | Production API key       |
| `RUNPOD_ENDPOINT_ID` | runpod | Your Runpod endpoint ID |
| `S3_*`            | runpod   | S3/R2 credentials        |

**Convex Container:**

| Variable              | Required | Description                        |
| --------------------- | -------- | ---------------------------------- |
| `CONVEX_CLOUD_ORIGIN` | Yes      | <https://convex-api.yourdomain.com>    |
| `CONVEX_SITE_ORIGIN`  | Yes      | <https://convex-http-actions.yourdomain.com> |
| `DISABLE_BEACON`      | No       | Set to `true` to disable telemetry |

**GitHub Secrets:**

| Secret                 | Description                |
| ---------------------- | -------------------------- |
| `DOCKERHUB_USERNAME`   | Docker Hub username        |
| `DOCKERHUB_TOKEN`      | Docker Hub access token    |
| `CONVEX_ADMIN_KEY`     | From generate_admin_key.sh |
| `GOOGLE_CLIENT_ID`     | Google OAuth client ID     |
| `GOOGLE_CLIENT_SECRET` | Google OAuth client secret |
| `BETTER_AUTH_SECRET`   | Auth encryption secret     |

See `.env.dev.example` and `.env.production.example` for all options.

Commit message:

add OTel (& Grafana endpoint env doc)

README.md, after:

# Academic Reader

PDF → readable HTML converter using [Marker](https://github.com/datalab-to/marker).

Supports PDF, DOCX, XLSX, PPTX, HTML, EPUB, and images.

## Quick Start

```bash
cp .env.dev.example .env.dev   # Configure dev environment
bun run dev                    # Start development servers
```

## Backend Modes

| Mode      | GPU           | File Storage     | Setup                      |
| --------- | ------------- | ---------------- | -------------------------- |
| `local`   | Your machine  | Local filesystem | NVIDIA GPU + Docker        |
| `runpod`  | Runpod cloud  | S3/R2/MinIO      | Runpod API key + S3 config |
| `datalab` | Datalab cloud | Memory (temp)    | Datalab API key            |

Set `BACKEND_MODE` in `.env.dev` for development.

## Architecture

```
                                 Browser
                                    │
                                    ▼
                           Cloudflare (proxy/protection)
                                    │
                                    ▼
                             VPS port 443
                                    │
                                    ▼
                          Traefik (Dokploy's proxy)
                                    │
                    ┌───────────────┴───────────────┐
                    │                               │
            Host: academic-reader.com    Host: convex-api.academic-reader.com
                    │                               │
                    ▼                               ▼
              app container               convex-backend container
                    │
                    ▼
        ┌────────── OR ──────────┐
        │                        │
     Datalab              Runpod ◀──▶ R2
```

Frontend and API served from VPS via Dokploy. Cloudflare proxy provides DDoS protection and caching.

### API Endpoints

| Endpoint                      | Purpose                     |
| ----------------------------- | --------------------------- |
| `POST /api/upload`            | Upload file (to S3 or temp) |
| `POST /api/convert/:fileId`   | Start conversion job        |
| `GET /api/jobs/:jobId/stream` | SSE progress stream         |
| `GET /api/download/:jobId`    | Download converted HTML     |
| `GET /api/auth/*`             | Auth (proxied to Convex)    |

### Storage

- **local mode** - /tmp/academic-reader-uploads/{uuid}.{ext} (dev mode only)
- **datalab mode** - In-Memory: API accepts files directly for processing
- **runpod mode** - S3/R2 cloud for prod, MinIO with temp tunnel for dev

## Development

```bash
bun run dev            # Start with mode from .env.dev
bun run dev:local      # Override to local mode
bun run dev:datalab    # Override to datalab mode
bun run dev:runpod     # Override to runpod mode
```

Add `--dashboard` to enable Convex dashboard at localhost:6791.

All modes use self-hosted Convex via Docker - no account needed.

## Production Deployment

Production uses [Dokploy](https://dokploy.com) for container orchestration with automatic deployments via GitHub Actions.

### Prerequisites

1. VPS with Dokploy installed
2. Domain with DNS on Cloudflare (proxy enabled)
3. Docker Hub account

### Deployment Flow

```
Push to main
    │
    ├─► GitHub Actions builds image
    │   └─► Pushes to Docker Hub
    │       └─► Dokploy detects new tag and redeploys
    │
    └─► If frontend/convex/* changed
        └─► GitHub Actions deploys Convex functions
```

### Initial Setup

1. **Install Dokploy on VPS**

   ```bash
   curl -sSL https://dokploy.com/install.sh | sh
   ```

2. **Deploy Convex** (via Dokploy Compose with the self-hosted Convex blueprint)

3. **Deploy App** (via Dokploy Docker Image from Docker Hub)

4. **Configure domains** in Dokploy:
   - `yourdomain.com` → app container (port 8787)
   - `convex.yourdomain.com` → convex-backend (port 3210)

5. **Set up Cloudflare DNS**:

   ```
   A    @        <VPS_IP>    Proxied
   A    convex   <VPS_IP>    Proxied
   ```

6. **Generate Convex admin key**:

   ```bash
   docker exec <convex-container> ./generate_admin_key.sh
   ```

7. **Add GitHub Secrets**:
   - `DOCKERHUB_USERNAME`
   - `DOCKERHUB_TOKEN`
   - `CONVEX_ADMIN_KEY`
   - `GOOGLE_CLIENT_ID`
   - `GOOGLE_CLIENT_SECRET`
   - `BETTER_AUTH_SECRET`

### Convex Dashboard

The dashboard is not publicly exposed. Access options:

- Via Tailscale: `http://your-vps-tailscale-hostname:6791`
- Via SSH tunnel: `ssh -L 6791:localhost:6791 user@your-vps`

### Monitoring (Optional)

For structured logging via Grafana/Loki:

1. Deploy [dokploy-grafana-compose](https://github.com/quochuydev/dokploy-grafana-compose) as a Compose project in Dokploy
2. Set `OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_ENDPOINT=http://alloy:4318` in the app container

## Configuration

### Development (.env.dev)

| Variable             | Required     | Description                            |
| -------------------- | ------------ | -------------------------------------- |
| `BACKEND_MODE`       | Yes          | `local`, `runpod`, or `datalab`        |
| `SITE_URL`           | Yes          | Frontend URL (default: localhost:5173) |
| `DATALAB_API_KEY`    | datalab      | From [datalab.to](https://datalab.to)  |
| `RUNPOD_API_KEY`     | runpod       | From Runpod dashboard                  |
| `RUNPOD_ENDPOINT_ID` | runpod       | Your endpoint ID                       |
| `GOOGLE_API_KEY`     | local/runpod | For Gemini API                         |

### Production (set in Dokploy UI)

**App Container:**

| Variable                      | Required | Description                             |
| ----------------------------- | -------- | --------------------------------------- |
| `BACKEND_MODE`                | Yes      | `datalab` or `runpod`                   |
| `SITE_URL`                    | Yes      | <https://yourdomain.com>                |
| `DATALAB_API_KEY`             | datalab  | Production API key                      |
| `RUNPOD_ENDPOINT_ID`          | runpod   | Your Runpod endpoint ID                 |
| `S3_*`                        | runpod   | S3/R2 credentials                       |
| `OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_ENDPOINT` | No       | `http://alloy:4318` for Grafana logging |

**Convex Container:**

| Variable              | Required | Description                                  |
| --------------------- | -------- | -------------------------------------------- |
| `CONVEX_CLOUD_ORIGIN` | Yes      | <https://convex-api.yourdomain.com>          |
| `CONVEX_SITE_ORIGIN`  | Yes      | <https://convex-http-actions.yourdomain.com> |
| `DISABLE_BEACON`      | No       | Set to `true` to disable telemetry           |

**GitHub Secrets:**

| Secret                 | Description                |
| ---------------------- | -------------------------- |
| `DOCKERHUB_USERNAME`   | Docker Hub username        |
| `DOCKERHUB_TOKEN`      | Docker Hub access token    |
| `CONVEX_ADMIN_KEY`     | From generate_admin_key.sh |
| `GOOGLE_CLIENT_ID`     | Google OAuth client ID     |
| `GOOGLE_CLIENT_SECRET` | Google OAuth client secret |
| `BETTER_AUTH_SECRET`   | Auth encryption secret     |

See `.env.dev.example` and `.env.production.example` for all options.
